TEACH *XmDemos                                 Jonathan Meyer, Feb 1990

This file describes the demonstration libraries available in Poplog for
the Motif widget set.

         CONTENTS - (Use <ENTER> g to access required sections)

 --  Introduction
 --  Dialog Windows
 --  Text Controls
 --  Basic Controls
 --  See Also


Introduction
------------

Included in Poplog 14.1 is a set of demonstration programs written in
Pop-11 for the Motif widgetset. The demonstration programs serve several
purposes. The programs are:

    o   a way of finding what widgets are in Motif
    o   an illustration of programming with the X Toolkit in Pop-11
    o   examples of how to use each of the Motif widgets
    o   code that you might find useful in your applications

Note that the demonstrations have very little functionality associated
with them - most of the widgets will 'work', but just don't do very much
when you click/select/drag on them.

Read HELP *MOTIF to learn how to start using Motif widgets. TEACH
*MOTIF is a tutorial showing you how to create a simple control
panel.

To run the demos, you need to execute:

    lib XmDemos

This library first adds the X demo directory to your search path, and
then loads LIB *XmDemoUtils, which loads all of the Motif widgets
and defines a few useful procedures, including the one to manage
the demo menu. This will take some time to load, since Poplog has to
dynamically link in Motif widgets. After loading XmDemoUtils, each
of the Xm demos is loaded in turn. When they have finished loading, a
menu will appear on your display. The following menu choices are
available on the Demo Menu:

    Dialog Windows
    Text Controls
    Basic Controls

Dialog Windows
--------------

This demo is based on the C program xmdialog.c which is provided with
Motif. It has a main control panel that is used for creating instances
of each of the dialog widgets in Motif. The widgets can also be created
in non-dialog widgets, ie. as top level application windows. The control
panel includes several settings that let you modify how the dialogs
appear and resize. The code for this demo is in LIB XmDialogsDemo

The following dialog widgets are demonstrated:

            bulletin board dialog
            command
            error dialog
            file selection dialog
            form dialog
            information dialog
            message dialog
            prompt dialog
            question dialog
            selection dialog
            warning dialog
            working dialog

Text Controls
-------------

This demo produces a window showing the  basic types of textual
controls in Motif: TextField, TextEditor, List and ScrollingList. The
code for this demo is in LIB *XmTextDemo.

Basic Controls
--------------

This demo produces a window displaying one of each of the basic
components in the Motif widgetset: Labels, PushButtons, ToggleButtons,
Radio buttons, Option menus, ArrowButtons, Separators, ScrollBars and
Sliders. You can interact with the components, although the demo does
not define any actions to perform when you do activate buttons etc. The
code for this demo is in LIB *XmControlsDemo.

See Also
--------

    HELP  *MOTIF     - Motif Widget Set overview
    TEACH *MOTIF     - Motif Widget Set tutorial
    HELP  *Xpw       - Poplog Widget Set overview
    TEACH *Xpw       - Tutorial for Poplog Widget Set
    HELP  *X         - Outline of X facilities in Poplog

--- C.x/x/pop/teach/XmDemos
--- Copyright University of Sussex 1990. All rights reserved. ----------
