Compiled 23 Aug 2001
Original in bham-build-scripts/README
Please report problems to A.Sloman@cs.bham.ac.uk


FILES IN THIS DIRECTORY
    README
        THIS FILE
    mkall.local
        Master command file for creating saved images in a
        temporary directory which can later be moved to $poplocalbin
        The other scripts put the saved images in $poplocalbin
        So before they are invoked $poplocalbin is redfined,temporarily

        Edit it to remove things you don't want, and to set the
        location of the temporary directory

        Run this as

            mkall.local > mkall.local.log

        Then examine the log file. Takes a minute or two to run.

        As provided this includes the saved images we build in
        Birmingham, including some demos you you will probably
        not want. Just comment out the relevant bits.

ESSENTIAL SCRIPTS TO RUN
    The files with suffix '.local' are modified versions of
    corresponding system files in $usepop/pop/com/ (= $popcom)

    mkstartup.local
        Creates local version of the startup.psv file, which is the
        basic saved image for Pop-11. This version includes objectclass
        rclib, and various other things. Requires $bhamteach.tar.gz
        (It MAY require something not in there, which I have forgotten)

    mkclisp.local
        Create common lisp
        (Prints a lot of warning messages which can be ignored)

    mkplog.local
        Creates the prolog saved image

    mkpml.local
        Creates saved image for Poplog ML

    mkxved.local
        Create local saved image to run XVed from unix command line

ONES YOU WILL PROBABLY WANT
    mkxvedlisp
        Create local saved image to run XVed from unix command line
        starting up in lisp mode

    mkxvedpro
        Create local saved image to run XVed from unix command line
        starting up in Prolog mode

OPTIONAL DEMO PROGRAMS AND TUTORS
    Edit mkall.local to remove these if you wish.

    mkboole
        Create a logic tutor for propositional logic.
        Written in Pop11. See LIB logic

    mkeliza.local
        Eliza demo, based on LIB elizaprog

    mkgblocks
        Make SHRDLU-like blocks demo (requires rclib)

    mkgram.local
        Compiles LIB gramdemo, to create a simple demo of parsing
        sentences about what happened in the kitchen

    mklogic.local
        Creates a prolog tutor written in prolog. It uses a simplified
        dialect of prolog which looks like English.
        See
            $usepop/pop/plog/lib/logic.pl
            $usepop/pop/plog/lib/logic.tch
                The text file used
    mkrc_poly
        Creates a demo using rc_graphic. Can teach 6 year olds
        to start thinking about geometry

    mkrhino
        Creates a version of the rhino program that is based in
        Ved (not Xved). Use the numbered keypad keys to move the
        hunter (H) to get to the camp (C) without being eaten by
        rhinos (which are hidden at first). Pop11 code is in
        LIB rhino

MAINTENANCE SCRIPTS
    mkind.local
        Builds the index for ENTER sourcefile
        Re-run occasionally (after adding new library programs)
        Edit $poplocal/local/lib/mkind.p to specify directories
        to be searched

    mklocalindex
        Creates an index in each of the local library directories
        (but needs to be edited if new libraries are created)


I can provide other scripts, e.g. to create saved image with
sim_agent precompiled, etc. Or copy and edit one of these.
